Title: BIM Philosophy
----
Date: 04 Jan 2013 23:34:53
----
Author: evan-bourquard
----
Text: When a small firm undertakes a big change, such as changing the way they document their projects, great care must be taken to execute that upgrade without fundamentally altering the way they practice or affecting the quality of their documentation. I thought I might take a moment to share a few thoughts on the "fun" part of the changeover process at Schacht Aslani Architects: developing our office philosophy towards the use of Building Information Modeling (BIM) and how fellow staff member Casey Borgen and I wrote the office manual for the use of REVIT.

Like many firms, over the last decade our office has charged forward into the Building Information Modeling arena. Building Information Modeling (BIM) is a real paradigm shift in the way architects think about and document design projects in development. Unlike other 3D visualization software that emerged a decade or so ago (like Sketchup and 3D Studio MAX), a true BIM model allows architects to fully model 3D elements of a building in real time. We construct the building using intelligent components that contain real information (like materials or identity data) and that interact intelligently with one another. From this virtual model or database, we then extract the traditional 2D representations of a project (plans, sections, elevations, and details) that we need to communicate with the contractor and upon which our contractual obligations are based. From a user standpoint this is an amazing transformation, as we now use more of our time "building" a project, and less time executing rote drawing operations.

When developing our REVIT Manual and office standards, here are a few fundamental thoughts that we used to organize our work:

Don't try to teach everything. There is already a vast collection of resources and voices available to provide basic how-to assistance with the REVIT program. So in the manual we decided NOT to try to explain or teach basic operations of the REVIT program. That accomplishes two important things: first it allows new staff to bring new ideas and practices into the office, and second it saves time because we aren't chasing small tweaks to the manual to keep it up to date with the development of the program itself. The document assumes baseline knowledge of the program and focusses on what makes our use of the program unique.
<ol>
	<li>Answer "How Should I" instead of "How Do I". The primary purpose of the REVIT Manual is to establish the unique and specific methodology that is to be used on our projects. Instead of answering the question, "How do I do x?" this document mostly deals with, "How should I do x?" This creates a framework for what we feel are best practices when dealing with certain difficult issues, like modeling casework or drawing details. By setting some basic guidelines for how users in the office should tackle complex problems, we have more flexibility with staffing later phases and more consistency in the final product.</li>
	<li>Organization is the key the efficiency. In addition to setting Revit standards, the Manual also addresses some peripheral issues, including basic folder and project organization, and provides examples of SAA graphic formats. This helps keep teams on track in terms of finding and quickly using information generated by others, and makes adjustments to graphic look and feel easier to accomplish office-wide. It also helps non-users locate and use project information as the structure stays consistent across projects. Project examples and graphic identity examples are commonly located for everyone to use.</li>
	<li>Darwin was right. Like all living things, businesses need to evolve to stay alive and relevant. Just because we develop a document on how SAA staff should use REVIT doesn't mean we've completed solved a problem. In addition to a strong culture of collaboration that already exists in the office, to prevent stagnation we bring all the REVIT users together for monthly training sessions. These are part update on portions of the manual, part presentation by project teams on how they solved a specific problem or issues, and part REVIT therapy. The informal format allows new programs, uses and techniques to be disseminated to the rest of the user group organically, and provides a space for the community of users to talk about and refine our office philosophy.</li>
	<li>It's only a tool. At SAA we pride ourselves on the quality of our design and deliverables. The use of a new program or process can't fundamentally change what we want to accomplish in terms of design or sustainability on our projects. Our office focuses heavily on iterative design and the development of multiple options simultaneously that are then evaluated together. The REVIT Manual includes chapters on the best ways to organize and use the program to generate and track these design options. This allows our office to continue to practice the way that we want to, and not the other way around.</li>
	<li>K.I.S.S. Keeping it simple is the best way to make sure that the REVIT document will stay relevant. If it is too complex, it will not be updated and will no longer be a useful tool. Organized the manual by chapter and including "how-to" sections allows us to focus on specific tasks. By focusing on the philosophy behind the decisions of the various issues in the chapters, we avoid being bogged down trying to explain compound operations.</li>
</ol>
I've included a snapshot of our REVIT manual table of contents to give you a visual on the organization of the document. Also attached are a few "out of the box" 3d views of current projects that I thought I would share to show you what we can do with the program.
----
