Title: Creative Coding
----
Date: 2012-06-14
----
Text: 
I’ll be using this section of our blog in a continued exploration of the role of computers, algorithmic models, and generative systems in the design field. Scripting, and the use of complex algorithms have enabled designers to create complex organic shapes that would not be possible with traditional drafting methods. You can call this parametric modeling, creative coding, or generative design, but the key component is the same. The role of the designer has shifted into one where they build and manipulate the system that does the drawing, instead of actually taking pen to paper. A series of simple rules, iterated thousands of times with slightly shifting parameters and an element of randomness, can produce emergent organic forms. A very great overview of generative design can be found at Cadalyst.

This first week, I’ll be taking a look at the leading platforms for creative coding and generative design. By no way is this an exhaustive list, but should be helpful for someone with no experience in the field. I’ll give examples of the type of work that has been done with each platform, and the best way to approach that platform. Once again, I don’t intend for this to be a comprehensive guide, but rather a very brief introduction that will be expanded in the weeks and months to come.

	“Generative design is a morphogenetic process using algorithms structured as not-linear systems for endless unique and un-repeatable results performed by an idea-code, as in Nature.”

	Celestino Soddu, 1992

###Processing

Processing is a great introduction for those looking to experiment with generative design, as it has very low barriers to entry, a detailed set of tutorials and examples, and an active and helpful user base. One of the stated aims of Processing is to act as a tool to get non-programmers started with programming, through the instant gratification of visual feedback. The language builds on the Java language, but uses a simplified syntax and graphics programming model. Users can jump in and produce visual output within minutes of starting the program. If you’re interested in a great, detailed overview of Processing, and computational art in general, I recommend Processing, by Ira Greenberg.

There are libraries available that allow Processing to communicate with the outside world, using video, networked data sets, and I/O interfaces such as the Arduino and Kinect. (I’ll focus in more detail on the role of the Kinect in a later article, and the profound impact it has had on the democratization of natural user interfaces.) While it’s not necessarily the ideal platform for it, Processing can also work into a fabrication pipeline through the DXF library, allowing sketches to be brought into AutoCAD for manipulation.

Despite the fact that Processing was designed as an entry-level platform, some very advanced projects have been developed with it.

####Unnamed Soundsculpture by Daniel Franke & Cedric Kiefer

The basic idea of the project is built upon the consideration of creating a moving sculpture from the recorded motion data of a real person. For our work we asked a dancer to visualize a musical piece (Kreukeltape by Machinenfabriek) as closely as possible by movements of her body. She was recorded by three depth cameras (Kinect), in which the intersection of the images was later put together to a three-dimensional volume (3d point cloud), so we were able to use the collected data throughout the further process. 

(vimeo: https://vimeo.com/38840688)

The three-dimensional image allowed us a completely free handling of the digital camera, without limitations of the perspective. The camera also reacts to the sound and supports the physical imitation of the musical piece by the performer. She moves to a noise field, where a simple modification of the random seed can consistently create new versions of the video, each offering a different composition of the recorded performance. The multi-dimensionality of the sound sculpture is already contained in every movement of the dancer, as the camera footage allows any imaginable perspective.

####My Little Piece of Privacy by Niklas Roy

Nicklas Roy’s workshop is located in an old storefront with a big window facing towards the street. In an attempt to create more privacy inside, he decided to install a small but smart curtain in that window. The curtain is smaller than the window, but an additional surveillance camera and an old laptop provide it with intelligence: The computer sees the pedestrians and locates them. With a motor attached, it positions the curtain exactly where the pedestrians are.

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rKhbUjVyKIc)

###Cinder

Along the same lines as Processing is the Cinder library. Cinder is a library for C++ that allow for complex creative applications. Cinder was not designed for entry-level creative coding, and requires an understanding of advanced programming concepts. However, with that complexity, Cinder provides a powerful, intuitive toolbox for programming graphics, audio, video, networking, image processing and computational geometry.

###Rhino + Grasshopper + Python

Rhino is a traditional 3D modeling program that is a bit more focused on production and fabrication than interactive art. What makes it unique in the generative design field is the integration of a scripting language and parametric plugins, especially Grasshopper. Grasshopper provides a framework to develop parametric models without the need for scripting. Complex 3D geometries can be designed and adjusted through sets of parameters in a graphic environment. One of the great benefits of Grasshopper is that is opens up generative design to non-programmers.
----